Full-Sized Keyboard (100% Layout)
Perfect for Lots of Number Entry
Full-sized keyboards are the go-to for people who need to do lots of data entry and require frequent use of the number pad. Full-sized keyboards are standard in offices and is what most people think of when they imagine a keyboard. The full-sized keyboards come standard with a number pad, home cluster, function keys, and arrow keys. The number pad is typically located on the right, but some keyboards come with it on the left.   A full-sized keyboard will usually have 104 keys.
Comfortable but Bulky
Full-size keyboards are great for anyone who needs to have a versatile selection of keys at their disposal, whether it be for gaming, work, or even just browsing the internet. They can offer lots of options for programmable keys and are easy to type on since none of the keys are on a lower layer, except for the standard ones.
Sometimes More Expensive
It’s important to keep in mind, full-size mechanical keyboards can be a bit more expensive than smaller sizes because they require lots of extra switches and keycaps to complete the build. It may not be feasible to build a custom full-size keyboard due to the cost, but it is possible to find pre-built ones for relatively cheap on Amazon.
Fun fact: For data entry, it’s actually more efficient to have the number pad on the left, so you can place your right hand on the arrow keys, that way you don’t need to lift your hands at all when entering data into Excel. It may feel strange at first, but once you get used to it you’ll notice a difference.
1800 Compact Keyboard (96% Layout)
1800 Compact: The Lost Keyboard Size
Finding an 1800 compact keyboard is similar to finding a unicorn, there isn’t that many being sold. 1800-Compact keyboards are usually lost between the cracks, they are a great middle ground between tenkeyless and full-sized keyboards. We put together a post of our favorite 1800 compact keyboards if you want to do further research.
1800 compact keyboard layouts are similar to a full-sized layout except they smush together the number pad and the rest of the keyboard to save space. These are keyboards are slightly more narrow, so they are slightly smaller and more compact. This makes the keyboard easier to pack up and take with you. Additionally, the compact full-sized layouts doesn’t drop any of the keys, making it extremely easy and comfortable to type on.
Slightly Different Layouts
Depending on the specific keyboard layout, some keyboards may drop the home cluster keys and others may keep them, it just depends on the specific layout design. Be careful when buying one of these and make sure all the keys you want are there. A lot of times these are made through group-buys although there are a few available online for order.
Smallest Size with Number Pad
If you enjoy using a number pad and can’t live without one, the 1800 compact layout is the smallest size keyboard you can go without getting rid of it. Many people find this keyboard to be their “sweet spot” for that reason.
Tenkeyless or TKL Keyboard (80% Layout)
TKL: The Perfect Keyboard Size for Most People
Tenkeyless keyboards typically have 87 keys, the perfect layout to balance size and functionality. Unlike full-sized keyboards, they do not have a number pad which makes the keyboard more compact and easier to take on the go. Most people don’t use the number pad heavily, so they are able to get rid of the extra baggage without it impacting their typing too much. If you want to check out some more TKL keyboards, follow the link to this post.
Compact and Comfortable
A more compact keyboard also allows for more desk space, so you’ll be able to more comfortably write notes into a notepad on the side of your keyboard without feeling to constrained by a lack of space. Plus, your mouse will be much closer to your hand when typing, so you’ll have to travel much less to reach for the mouse.
Tenkeyless keyboards still have the arrow keys, home cluster, and function keys, so you should still be able to game and type comfortably. You’ll be able to find a lot of different tenkeyless mechanical keyboards for sale, because usually most keyboards will come with a compact TKL equivalent.
75% Keyboard
￼
75% Keyboards: Uncommon but Awesome
75% keyboards have an interesting design. They are a slightly more compact version of a tenkeyless board, they place the arrow keys and home cluster right next to each other and align the home cluster vertically to save space. This allows for everything to be packed in tight and snug. There are a lot less 75% keyboards on the market, so your options will be limited. Luckily we put together our favorite 75% keyboards so you can find them easily.
Very Small Adjustment Period
It may take some time to get used to the some of the strange key sizes and placement. For example, the right shift key is typically much smaller than usual and building the muscle memory of where the new home cluster is located will take some time. Fortunately, these keys aren’t used too often anyways, so it should not impact typing too much. If you’re a fan of buying customized keycaps, you may need to do a little extra searching to find a set that works with the 75% layout, due to some of the strange key sizes.
65% Keyboard
￼
Who Needs The Function Row Anyways?
65% keyboards take compactness to a whole new level. Instead of just getting rid of the number pad, these keyboards also drop the function row and the home cluster (on some layouts)! Who needs those extra keys anyways? This is the smallest keyboard size you can get that will still have arrow keys. Like 75% keyboards, 65% are less common but have a small fan-base in the keyboard community. You can find our favorite 65% keyboards through this link, you don’t want to miss this one.
Smallest Size with Dedicated Arrow Keys: Great for Gaming
These are extremely portable, light, and still incredibly useful. For some people, not having the home cluster or function row can feel like a major handicap, but others may be unfazed without them. It mainly comes down to personal preference. 65% keyboards are still a great size to use for gaming because they have the arrow keys and can be useful for moving around a page whilst typing.
Slight Differences Between 65% Keyboard Layouts
There are usually two different 65% layouts and which one you choose usually comes down to preference. We’ll go over some of the basic differences to help you decide.
65% Layout #1: All Keys Smushed Together
This layout is basically what it sounds like. All of the keys are closely located together so the keyboard is ultra-compact. The home cluster is laid out vertically instead of the usual box shape and the arrow keys are blended into the rest of the keyboard. If you’re looking to save on size and willing to get used to the keys being close together, this one is for you.
65% Layout #2: Separate Home Cluster and Arrow Keys
Photo by u/DragonballUnlimited
This 65% layout is my personal favorite. It’s slightly wider than option #1, but in my opinion feels much for comfortable. The arrow keys on this layout are usually spaced out slightly further away from the rest of the keys and the home cluster is also spaced away. This layout is similar to a TKL, but without the function row or a few keys from the home cluster.
60% Keyboard
Anne Pro 2 60% Keyboard
60% Keyboard: Very Popular and Easy to Find
60% keyboards are popular in the gaming and mechanical keyboard enthusiast keyboard community. Not quite a common as TKL or fullsized, but there are a lot of different 60% keyboards available online. Due to their small, compact, and symmetrical shape, they are the most common size for custom keyboard builds.
Cheaper to Buy & Build Yourself
Because of their smaller size, it can be relatively cheap to buy switches and keycaps for custom builds, plus there are a variety of different PCB layouts and case designs specifically for 60% keyboards. Pre-build keyboards are also quite cheap as well, you can find pretty good deals if you’re willing to drop to the 60% keyboard size.
Might Be Too Small For Some
A 60% keyboard may be outside the comfort zone for most people, the lack of arrow keys, home cluster, number pad, and function row, may make typing feel like a whole new skill to learn. People who buy and use 60% keyboards should know what they are getting into before buying. For some people, it won’t impact their typing experience too much, but fair warning to those who want to try the size out.
40% Keyboard
Smallest Keyboard you Can Still Type On
40% keyboards are the most barebones keyboard available that you can still type on. On top of everything removed for 60% keyboards (no number pad, function row, arrow keys, home cluster), 40% keyboards also get rid of all the numbers on the top row. That’s right, there are no numbers on this keyboard layout. In addition, you also get rid of all the non-letter keys such as the semi-colon, quotes, etc.
Long Adjustment Period
If you want to get proficient typing with a 40% keyboard, you’ll have to get used to frequently changing layers to be able to enter numbers and symbols. This will require lots of time to get used to, but by doing so, you’ll save lots of space on your desk and have a light and compact keyboard to take on the go.
Hard to Find
Due to how strange these can be to type on, there is not a very high demand for 40% keyboards, so they are not available from the normal keyboard manufacturers. Instead, you’ll need to buy the parts online and assembly yourself or find a group buy online to get one custom made. We put together a list of 40% keyboards to help you.
Number Pad
Buying a Separate Numpad
Number pads typically come with 17 keys and come with the same layout found on a full-sized keyboard. You can buy number pads separately if you don’t want to have a full-sized keyboard. This allows you to move the number pad on either side of your keyboard.
As mentioned above, this can make data entry more efficient and comfortable. Also, if you’re playing a game that doesn’t require a full keyboard, you can use specifically the number pad instead and save space. This can lower the chances of pressing the wrong key. You can find our favorite numberpads through this link.